Chapter 12 wordsmithing and polishing pass (#357)
browserengineering/book: book/scheduling-and-threading.md

        self.args = None
```

The point of a task is that it can be created at one point in time,
and then run at some later time by a task runner of some kind,
according to a scheduling algorithm.[^event-loop] In our browser, the
task runner will store tasks in a first-in first-out queue:

[^event-loop]: The event loops we discussed in [Chapter
2](graphics.md#eventloop) and [Chapter
11](visual-effects.md#sdl-creates-the-window) are task runners, where
the tasks to run are provided by the operating system.

``` {.python replace=(self)/(self%2c%20tab)}
class TaskRunner:
    def __init__(self):
        self.tasks = []

    def schedule_task(self, callback):
        self.tasks.append(callback)
```

When the time comes to run a task, our task runner can just remove
the first task from the queue and run it:

``` {.python expected=False}
class TaskRunner:
    def run(self):
        if len(self.tasks) > 0):
            task = self.tasks.pop(0)
            task.run()

class Tab:
    def __init__(self):
        self.task_runner = TaskRunner()
```

First-in-first-out is a simplistic way to choose which task to run
next, and real browsers have sophisticated *schedulers* which consider

> things like XXX.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
many different factors.
```

Reviewer: There is also this link, but it's kind of old and weak sauce:

Reviewer: https://blog.chromium.org/2015/04/scheduling-tasks-intelligently-for_30.html

Author: I'll include the link, better than nothing.

        self.args = args
        self.__name__ = "task"

    def run(self):
        self.task_code(*self.args)
        self.task_code = None
        self.args = None
```

The point of a task is that it can be created at one point, and then
run at some later point by a task runner of some kind.[^event-loop] In
our browser, the task runner will store tasks in a first-in first-out
queue:

[^event-loop]: Event loops, which we discussed in [Chapter
2](graphics.md#eventloop) and [Chapter
11](visual-effects.md#sdl-creates-the-window) are one kind of task

> runner, where the tasks to run are provided by the operating system.

Reviewer: What other kind of task runners than event loops did you have in mind?

Author: Fixed, I meant to refer to the two specific event loops we've seen. Changed to:

> The event loops we discussed in Chapter 2 and Chapter 11 are task runners, where the tasks to run are provided by the operating system.

``` {.python replace=(self)/(self%2c%20tab)}
class TaskRunner:
    def __init__(self):
        self.tasks = []

    def schedule_task(self, callback):
        self.tasks.append(callback)
```

When the time comes to run a task, our task runner can just remove
the first task from the queue and run it:

``` {.python expected=False}
class TaskRunner:
    def run(self):
        if len(self.tasks) > 0):
            task = self.tasks.pop(0)
            task.run()

class Tab:
    def __init__(self):
        self.task_runner = TaskRunner()
```

> This is a pretty simplistic of choosing which task to run next, and

Reviewer: ```suggestion
First-in-first-out is a simplistic way of choosing which task to run next, and
```

real browsers have sophisticated *schedulers* which consider things

> like XXX.

Reviewer: ?

Author: Ah, yes, I was hoping you could tell me what kinds of things the Chrome scheduler, for example, considers.

But even this simple scheduler lets us save tasks for later and
execute when there's time. For example, right now, when loading a web
page, our browser will download and run all scripts before doing its
rendering steps. That makes pages slower to load. We can fix this by
creating tasks for running scripts later.

``` {.python expected=False}
class Tab:
    def run_script(self, url, body):
        try:
            print("Script returned: ", self.js.run(body))
        except dukpy.JSRuntimeError as e:
            print("Script", url, "crashed", e)

    def load(self):
        for script in scripts:
            # ...
            header, body = request(script_url, url)
            self.task_runner.schedule_task(
                Task(self.run_script, script_url, body))
```

> To run those tasks, we need to call the `run` method on our

Reviewer: I think this makes more sense above the example of loading tasks, since without it it's not clear when tasks would ever run.

Author: Done

`TaskRunner`, which we can do in the main event loop:

``` {.python expected=False}
if __name__ == "__main__":
    while True:
        # ...
        browser.tabs[browser.active_tab].task_runner.run()
```

Here I've chosen to only run tasks on the active tab. Now our browser
will not run scripts until after `load` has completed and the event
loop comes around again.

This change is nice---pages will load a bit faster---but there's more
to it than that. Before this change, we no choice but to run scripts
right away just as they were loaded. But now that running scripts is a
`Task`, the task runner controls when it runs. It could run only one

> script per second, or only when the page is active, or only if there

Reviewer: ```suggestion
script per second, or at different rates for active and inactive pages, or only if there
```

Reviewer: (this is to distinguish from the previous paragraph, which already demonstrates only-active)

isn't a higher-priority user action to respond to. A browser could
even have multiple task runners, optimized for different use cases.

Timers and setTimeout

> =====================

Reviewer: Regarding whether we should keep setTimeout in the book: I've concluded that we should, for two reasons:
* the one I mentioned yesterday about introducing timers in a less complicated setting
* as a more gentle way to introduce asyc javascript tasks and prepare for rAF

Author: Ok

> Tasks are a natural way to support several JavaScript APIs that ask

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Tasks are *also* a natural way to support several JavaScript APIs that ask
```

Reviewer: I do like how you tried to use fewer words and more of a summary explanation of the runtime binding code though, to minimize the overhead.

script per second, or only when the page is active, or only if there
isn't a higher-priority user action to respond to. A browser could
even have multiple task runners, optimized for different use cases.

Timers and setTimeout
====================
=====================

It's often the case that when adding a task, it's not to be run right away, but
instead at some point in the future. One example is the
[`setTimeout`][settimeout] JavaScript API, which provides a way to run a
function a given number of milliseconds from now. For example,
Tasks are a natural way to support several JavaScript APIs that ask
for a function to be run at some point in the future. For example, the
[`setTimeout`][settimeout] JavaScript API lets you run a function some
number of milliseconds from now. This code prints "Callback" to the
console one minute in the future, for example:

[settimeout]: https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/API/setTimeout

``` {.javascript expected=false}
function callback() {
    console.log('Callback')
}
function callback() { console.log('Callback'); }
setTimeout(callback, 1000);
```
will print "Callback" to the console log one second from now.

> This API *could* be implemented by recording a time associated with each new

Reviewer: I guess you didn't like this point? The aim was to motivate why we should use these fancy thread things instead of polling, which is probably what a programmer unfamiliar with threads would have attempted.

Author: Oops, I meant to move this to a footnote and it got lost somewhere. I've resurrected the footnote. The point is good, but I think the first description should be a "positive" one.

> This runs `callback` in 1 seconds on a new Python thread. Now, it's

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This runs `callback` 1 second from now on a new Python thread. Now, it's
```

> due to the fact that multiple threads will be involved.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
due to the fact that multiple threads will be involved, but it's worth it.
```

Reviewer: This again is related to the polling sentence you deleted and my comment on it..

Author: This is good whether or not polling is presented first!

    SET_TIMEOUT_REQUESTS[handle] = callback;
    call_python("setTimeout", handle, time_delta)
}
```

The exported `setTimeout` function will create a timer, wait for the

> requested time period, and then call back into JavaScript to run the

Reviewer: ```suggestion
requested time period, and inform JavaScript to run the
```

> callback. The call back can call this `__runSetTimeout` function:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
callback. This happens via the `__runSetTimeout` function:
```

``` {.javascript file=runtime}
function __runSetTimeout(handle) {
    var callback = SET_TIMEOUT_REQUESTS[handle]
    delete SET_TIMEOUT_REQUESTS[handle];
    callback();
}
```

The Python side, however, is quite a bit more complex, because
`threading.Timer` executes its callback *on a new Python thread*. That
thread can't just call `evaljs` directly: we'll end up with JavaScript
running on two Python threads at the same time, which is not
ok.[^js-thread] Instead, the timer will have to merely add a new

> `Task`, which the main thread will execute, to call the callback:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
`Task`, which the primary thread will execute, to call the callback:
```

Reviewer: (can't say "main" or it would be inconsistent with later in the chapter)

Author: Great catch!

        threading.Timer(time / 1000.0, run_callback).start()
```

> Now only the main thread will call `evaljs`, which is better. But now

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Now only the proimary thread will call `evaljs`,. But now
```

:::

[cores]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Multi-core_processor

Long-lived threads
==================

Python not only lets you create timers, but you can create and manipulate
threads themselves, via the `threading.Thread` class. Let's use threads to
implement async `XHMLHttpRequest`, a feature we left out of
[Chapter 10](security.md#cross-site-requests). At the time, we implemented it
as a synchronous API, but in fact, the synchronous version of that API is almost
useless for real websites,^[It's also a huge performance footgun, for the same
reason we've been adding async tasks in this chapter!] because the whole point
of using this API is to keep the website responsive to the user while
network requests are going on.

Our approach will be to start a thread, run some code on it that does the
request and gets a response, then schedule a `Task` to send the response back
to the script. Starting a thread is easy: define a function that is the "main"
function of the thread, then start the thread with the function passed as the
`target` argument. When the main function exits, the thread will automatically
die.

In this example:
``` {.python expected=False}

> def run:

Reviewer: This example is too complicated, you think?

Author: Yeah. I think there's also a bit of a question here of defining our audience. If they haven't seen threads at all before, will they be able to follow the description here? It also introduces tricky questions like whether the console out is thread-safe, which we don't actually need to raise.

> Threads can also be used to have the browser multitask. For example,

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Threads can also be used to add browser multitasking. For example,
```

> browsers are now moving to deprecate this API.]

Reviewer: ```suggestion
browsers are now moving to deprecate the sync version of this API.]
```

    this.responseText = call_python("XMLHttpRequest_send",
        this.method, this.url, this.body, this.is_async, this.handle);
}
```

On the browser side, we'll need to split the `XMLHttpRequest_send`
function into three parts. The first part will resolve the URL and
do security checks:

``` {.python}
class JSContext:
    def XMLHttpRequest_send(self, method, url, body, is_async, handle):
        full_url = resolve_url(url, self.tab.url)
        if not self.tab.allowed_request(full_url):
            raise Exception("Cross-origin XHR blocked by CSP")
        if url_origin(full_url) != url_origin(self.tab.url):
            raise Exception(
                "Cross-origin XHR request not allowed")
```

Then, we'll define a function that makes the request and enqueues a
task for running callbacks:^[For async requests, the `return` at the
end of `run_load` is meaningless; it's only there for the sync version.]

``` {.python}
class JSContext:
    def XMLHttpRequest_send(self, method, url, body, is_async, handle):
        # ...
        def run_load():
            headers, body = request(
                full_url, self.tab.url, payload=body)

>             self.tab.task_runner.schedule_task(

Reviewer: I think there is my bug in the code here - should only schedule a task if is_async is true?

Author: You're right. Fixed. Do you think we should add some code to default `is_async` to `true` on the JavaScript side? Otherwise if you don't pass the value we will assume it is sync. Argument against is just that the code is super ugly since DukPy doesn't support ES6. Maybe we footnote it?

Reviewer: Let's go with a footnote.

                Task(self.dispatch_xhr_onload, body, handle))
            return body
```

Finally, depending on the `is_async` flag the browser will either call
this function right away, or in a new thread using the `target`
argument to the `Thread` constructor:

``` {.python}
class JSContext:
    def XMLHttpRequest_send(self, method, url, body, is_async, handle):
        # ...
        if not is_async:
            return run_load(is_async)
        else:
            load_thread = threading.Thread(target=run_load)
            load_thread.start()
```

Note that in the async case, the `XMLHttpRequest_send` method starts a
thread and then immediately returns. That thread will run in parallel
to the browser's main work until it adds a new task for running

> `dispatch_xhr_online` on the main thread. This method runs the

Reviewer: ```suggestion
`dispatch_xhr_onload` on the main thread. This method runs the
```

}
```

So tasks not only allow our browser to delay tasks until later, but
also allow applications running in the browser to do the same.
However, there's a whole other category of work done by the browser
not directly related to running JavaScript.

Rendering pipeline tasks
========================

So far we've focused on creating tasks that run JavaScript code. But
the results of that JavaScript code---and also the results of
interactions like loading new pages, scrolling, clicking, and
typing---are only available to the user after the browser renders the
page. In this sensem, the most important task in a browser is running

> the [rendering pipeline][graphics-pipline]: styling the HTML elements,

Reviewer: ```suggestion
the [rendering pipeline][graphics-pipleine]: styling the HTML elements,
```

constructing the layout tree, computing sizes and positions, painting
layout objects to a display list, rastering the result into surfaces,
and drawing those surfaces to the screen.

Right now, the browser executes these rendering steps eagerly: as soon
as the user scrolls or clicks, or as soon as JavaScript modifies the
document. But we want to make these interactions faster and smoother,

> and the very first step is to make rendering a schedulable task, so we

Reviewer: ```suggestion
and the very first step in doing so is to make rendering a schedulable task, so we
```

can decide when it occurs.

At a high level, that requires code like this:

``` {.python expected=False}
self.task_runner.schedule_task(Task(self.render))
```

However, rendering is special in that it never makes sense to do
scheduling twice in a row, since the page wouldn't have changed in
between. To avoid having two rendering tasks we'll add a boolean

> called named `needs_animation_frame` to each `Tab` which indicates

Reviewer: ```suggestion
called `needs_animation_frame` to each `Tab` which indicates
```

        self.needs_animation_frame = False
```

Now, take a look at all the other calls to `render` in your `Tab` and
`JSContext` methods. Instead of calling `render`, which causes the
browser to immediately rerun the rendering pipeline, these methods
should schedule the rendering pipeline to run later. For
future-proofing, I'm doing to do this in a new `set_needs_render`
call:

``` {.python expected=False}
class Tab
    def set_needs_render(self):
        self.schedule_animation_frame()
```

So, for example, the `load` method can call
`set_needs_render`:[^more-examples]

``` {.python}
class Tab:
    def load(self, url, body=None):
        # ...
        self.set_needs_render()
```

As can `innerHTML_set`:

``` {.python}
class JSContext:
    def innerHTML_set(self, handle, s):
        # ...
        self.tab.set_needs_render()
```

> There are more calls to `render`; you should find and fix all of them.

Reviewer: This repeats the footnote on line 487.

Author: Ah, woops, I meant to move this footnote to the main text.

So this handles the front half of the rendering pipeline: style,
layout, and paint. The back half of the rendering pipeline (raster and
draw) is handled by `Browser`, so the `Tab` needs to tell the

> `Browser` when to run it. I'll add a new `raster_and_draw` method for

Reviewer: ```suggestion
`Browser` to run it. I'll add a new `raster_and_draw` method for
```
